 # dbtest
 
`dbtest` is an utility for end to end testing DBT pipelines. `dbtest` lets you pick a model to test, it expects some mocked dependencies and a final result data. It asserts the data generated by a model  against the provided expected output.

`dbtest` does not mess with your dbt project, it simply generates SQL queries based on your project `manifests.json`. These SQL queries can be used as regular dbt tests.

## Workflow
  
1. Select a model you want to test
2. Picked any arbitrarly dependencies to Mock. Any intermediate models or sources are Ok. The mocked data is provided via CSV files.
3. Provide expected output result using a CSV file
4. Use `dbtest` cli to generate test queries
5. Generated queries are run via `dbt test` command


## Installation
- ToDo

## Usage
`dbtest --manifest target/manifest.json --tests tests_folder --output output_folder`

- `--manifest` is the path to your dbt's project `manifest.json`
- `--tests` is a path to a folder contaning `json` files. Each json file in that folder is a test definition (see examples below)
- `--output` is the path folder where the generated tests will be stored


## Detailed usage

1. Go to your dbt project: `cd my_project`
2. Create a folder to store your tests definitions: `mkdir autotests`
3. Create a json file per test definition. For example the Json file below is a single test in which there are two mocks `seed.jaffle_shop.raw_customers` and  `seed.jaffle_shop.raw_orders`. The test will run the model `"model.jaffle_shop.customers"`. The content of `output` has the data which will be used for assertions.

``` json
{
    "name": "dummy_test",
    "model": "model.jaffle_shop.customers",
    "mocks": {
        "seed.jaffle_shop.raw_customers": {
            "filepath": "seeds/raw_customers.csv",
            "types": {
                "id": "INT64"
            }
        },    
        "seed.jaffle_shop.raw_orders": {
            "filepath": "seeds/raw_orders.csv",
            "types": {
                "id": "INT64",
                "user_id": "INT64",
                "order_date":"DATE"
            }
        },   
    },
    "output": {
        "filepath": "output.csv",
        "types": {
            "customer_id": "INT64",
            "most_recent_order": "DATE",
            "number_of_orders": "INT64",
            "customer_lifetime_value": "FLOAT64",
            "first_order": "DATE"
        }
    }
}

```

4. Go to your dbt project, make sure you generated a `manifest.json` (e.g: run `dbt compile`)
5. run `dbtest --manifest target/manifest.json --tests dbtests --output tests`
6. Check the files in the output

## Example project
- ToDo

## Details

- This project uses `manifest.json` to figure out what are the dependencies of the model that you are testing.
- Given a model to test `dbtest` recursively rebuilds the sql queries accross dependencies
- While rebuilding a model SQL `dbtest` replaces table for given mocked data
- `dbtest` creates a giant SQL query with mocks and model SQL logic. The output of the query is then compared to the provided expected data via a `MINUS` sql operation.
 
